Thank you so much. Thank you for the honor of this award and for the opportunity to speak to you all. 
Today, we know more than ever about the early years of child development, especially that of the brain, 
the brain of a child who's nourished and nurtured read to, and played with. Protected from factors like 
stress and conflict has a best chance of developing its full potential because it's proven that children 
who receive proper care, nutrition, and stimulation in the first five years do much better in school and in 
life.
Sadly, this is not the case in my country or in so many other countries in the developing world where 
being born into poverty means never breaking out of it. We should be devastated that in 2017 there are 
still 250 million kids under five who are still at risk, who will likely be stunted physically and 
intellectually.
Now, take that in for a second. We're talking about newly the population of an entire country, the size 
of the US. This is a tragedy for those children and an epic, epic failure for all of us. If we don't attend to 
these kids in time, we're talking about intergenerational cycles of poverty and inequality.
And the wider the gap of inequality grows, the harder it becomes to reach across it. And the more 
numerous the faces of those born into poverty, the more difficult to see and empathize with each 
individual and recognize that if not for the pure geography of where they were born, they could be one 
of our children.
This should make us all furious. They should make us all want to take action because we all have a stake 
in the outcome. The world is facing some serious challenges. By 2050, massive population growth is 
expected, and we will need to feed 9 billion people, or we will risk being at the threshold of conflict and 
starvation.
Will this generation of kids be ready to take on the task of eliminating malnutrition and providing food 
security? Will they be prepared to come up with solutions and innovations to climate change, 
unemployment and the most complex issues that our society faces?
Who will help us manage our resources more efficiently and sustainably going forward from here to the 
next 20 years? It's your kids, it's Milan and Sasha, my kids. And those 250 million kids at risk who need 
us to tip the scales back in their favor.
Today's babies will drive tomorrow's business. Tomorrow's... Today's babies with their future 
productivity will fill tomorrow's economies. Their capacity to contribute, will shape tomorrow's 
societies, will solve tomorrow's problems. All of you, all of you here today have a critical, critical role to 
play.
So what can you do? Let's face it, in this room, there are some of the most powerful people in the world 
and definitely, I'm convinced that you know what it means to be ahead of the curve and you can be 
tremendously influential.
We need to apply the brains and strategies of business and the assets and the human resources and the 
talents of your companies to do social good and to solve social problems. All of us need to pick up where 
governments leave off.
That's the only way. And that said, it's not about letting governments off the hook on the countries 
about reengaging them. But we have to take the first steps because as business leaders, as 
businesspeople, we have the ideas, the agility, the organizational skills, the manpower, the female 
power, of course. When we started building schools in Colombia, we chose the most remote areas 
where there was literally nothing. There were no paved roads, no potable water, no electricity. And 
where historically the government had checked out, we checked in.
And we decided to build not only schools, but state-of-the-art schools. And we decided to include ECD as 
a key component. And we created comprehensive programs, comprehensive... a comprehensive model 
that included as well school feeding programs, parent and teaching training.
We engaged the government as our strategic partner, and we made it nearly impossible for them to say, 
'No' to doing their part. So the transformation in these communities could be seen immediately from 
the jobs generated to the hope-inspired, but the improvements to the infrastructure were jaw-dropping.
Electricity and potable water were made accessible. Roads were paved. Malnutrition plummeted. And 
the best part of all, the students responded academically so well. That, now those kids who could have 
been recruited by guerrillas or drug traffickers are on the way to the university or are in the university as 
we speak or are thriving their communities.
So now I don't have to call the government as often, thank God. No. Now they call us wanting to build 
more schools, wanting to invest more. So I'm not suggesting it's easy. But there is an exit strategy, a 
strategy to poverty, and it's getting those 250 million kids who are at risk, who need access to quality 
ECD programs.
So they get in school and stay in school. We have to push governments to invest more, honestly. We 
have to invest in campaigns for public awareness. We have to make access to pre-K education free and 
we have to create a fund for education just like AIDS and Malaria and Tuberculosis have their own fund.
I know I can sound vehement as Bono once called me, and because I am. He's completely right, and I 
know I can drive some people nuts with my insistence, but it's only because I'm so passionate, and the 
reason why I am so passionate is because I've seen it with my own eyes.
I've seen what education can do, what the investment in education can do. Miracles! And believe me, 
there is nothing more fun and satisfying than seeing a child who had almost no possibilities to succeed, 
flourish and thrive and perform well in life.
For me, it beats even winning a Grammy anyway. We can't press pass and ask those kids to wait to grow 
up until we have it all figured out. There isn't a moment to lose. We need to invest in humans.
It's the smart thing to do, the strategic thing to do and the just thing to do. Thank you.